NOTES ON THE POPSTATE ALGORITHM

        information stored at simulateNavigation time

Each simulateNavigation update is stored in a plain object called a Change.  This has no methods or anything, so it can be cloned into the browser history state without loss.  The Change object stores targetID, contentURL, contentElementID, and if given, postData.

Change objects are stored in a Map collection, with targetID as the key.  This means that if consecutive updates are done to the same target, the map keeps only the most recent.  If different targets are updated, the method that saves new changes (SetOfChanges.add) also checks if any of them are nested.  It tracks this in one other field of a Change object, containedBy, which is set to the targetID of any change that this one is inside of (or null).  If there are multiple levels of nesting, the containedBy links let you follow the sequence from innermost to outermost.

If an outer target is replaced again, all changes contained inside it are deleted from the collection, as their content is now gone from the document.

When simulateNavigation pushes state into history, that state includes a SPAREchanges property which copies the list stored in the map as a plain array.  The state also has fields for initialTitle, initialURL, newTitle, visibleURL (which is pretendURL if supplied, or contentURL if it was not), contextData, and targetID, each with “SPARE” prepended to the property name.  Because all these fields need to be cloneable, simulateNavigation validates cloneability for postData and contextData.  The initialURL and initialTitle values are those saved from when SPARE was first loaded.

If this is the first simulateNavigation call relative to an unmodified page as initially loaded, it first attaches a simplified state to the starting page, before pushing the new state.  That base state has no changes, newTitle, or visibleURL.  (It has targetID but that refers to the element about to be changed, not one that has been — maybe that field should be dropped.)

The history state therefore has everything needed to restore the page to that point.  But only if done in a valid order, which basically amounts to making sure outers come before inners.  The state it saves is not sorted.

The map storage assumes that the pages being loaded from are essentially static, or at least the layout is, if not the text in it.  If reloading from the same URL at a later time may produce different child elements, trying to restore a page may encounter errors.  SPARE is not intended to predictably manage active pages with unpredictable contents — that’s why the S stands for “Static”.


        how it’s used in the popstate event

If the user hits Back (or Forward, or selects a non-adjacent history entry from a dropdown), the state record associated with that entry is passed to the popstate handler(s) as a property of its event parameter.  (It's also available as the current value of history.state, and that's the only history record the API exposes — you can’t examine the past or future.)  The job of the handler is to compare the state in the internal map (representing the oage as currently seen by the user) with the state in the history record, and work out the delta to change the page from one to the other.

Note that if navigation comes from, or skips over, a separately loaded page, then before the handler is called, the URL saved in the history is freshly loaded before popstate is triggered, leaving SPARE’s map of changes reset to empty, and the initialTitle and initialURL may no longer match the values saved for them in history, instead probably matching newTitle and visibleURL.  In this case the popstate handler may have nothing to do, if the page content is consistent with the URL displayed.

The delta gets extracted by a method (SetOfChanges.needToRestore) which compares the array stored in the history state with the map stored internally.  It first finds two set differences: the changes to do, and the changes to undo.  The undo changes are those present in the map but absent in the array, and the changes to do are those either present in the array but not the map, or present in both but with differing parameters (contentURL, contentElementID, postData).  There are nuances to both.

For the undo changes, the tricky part is figuring out the source to undo from.  If containedBy is null it’s initialURL, but if not, it’s the contentURL of the containing change... unless that is also being done or undone.  ,......................FIGURE OUT**
        parent in map, same in state: use parent's contentURL from either source
        parent in map, different url in state: use parent contentURL from state
        parent in map, absent in state: process parent first, re-address child
        no parent in map, parent in state: ...doesn't this mean that the state's parent will update first, making the undo irrelevant?  EXPLORE POSSIBILITIES
        parent in map, nearer parent in state: use state's near-parent contentURL?  EXPLORE POSSIBILITIES
        parent in map, further parent in state: check map for ancestors::
                if match found, re-evaluate after reconciling that
                if no match found, try to work out overall order?
        ...the event state may refer to ids that don't exist in the document...
> So I've covered the basic cases, and a first tier of more complicated ones... what am I worried about it missing?  Edge cases — as things get more complicated, this could become a mazelike source of edges and corners.  With hairy enough situations I suspect it's possible to draw up a scenario in which there are two possible containedBy values associated with something, and it's impossible to tell which is innermost because they aren't in the DOM until an outer section is swapped in.  But wouldn't the saved state have to have an intact record of everything relevant in such a case?

For the do changes, you mostly just keep them as given in the history, but there’s an important rule: if a container is being redone, all its children also have to be redone even if they are identical to the records in the map.

Once needToRestore has finished gathering the changes that need to be made to make the history entry become true, it has to order them.  To do this, it combines the two groups into a new temporary map, then recalculates the containedBy links within this subset.  If one needed change is found to be a child of another, its containedBy value in the temporary map is set accordingly, though in the stored map it may have been a great-grandchild, or the parent might not have been present.  In simpler cases this link can be found in the current document, but in complex ones the necessary elements may not have been loaded yet, so it has to examine the containedBy links saved in the stored map and the history state. ........... FIGURE OUT**

>> MAYBE THAT COMBINATION MAP IS THE WRONG IDEA.  Maybe the right way to approach it is to just perform all the undo steps first, and all the [re]do steps after the undos.  Context for undos comes strictly from the current state, and context for the [re]dos comes strictly from the history record being recreated.  OBJECTION: this would not optimize cases where an outer [re]do encloses an inner undo, making the undo step unnecessary.

Okay, I have a way to think of what we want: we want something that is equivalent to undoing every change in the current map and then doing every change in the history state, and we just want to optimize out anything that updates the same element twice.
